docs: GEOS paper submittal to JOSS (#2886)
GEOS-DEV/GEOS: src/docs/JOSS/paper.md

---
title: 'GEOS-2023: A portable multi-physics simulation framework'
tags:
  - reservoir simulations
  - computational mechanics
  - multiphase flow
  - c++
authors:
  - name: Randolph R. Settgast
    orcid: 0000-0002-2536-7867
    corresponding: true
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Benjamin C. Corbett
    affiliation: 1
  - name: James Corbett
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Francois Hamon
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Thomas Gazzola
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Matteo Cusini
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Chris S. Sherman
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Sergey Klevzoff
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Nicola Castelletto
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Victor Paludetto Magri
    affiliation: 1
  - name: William R. Tobin
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Joshua White
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Brian M. Han
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Herve Gross
    affiliation: 2

>   - name: Stefano Framba

Reviewer: Framba -> Frambati

    affiliation: 2

>   - name: Aurilian Citrain

Reviewer: Aurilian -> Aurélien

  - name: Michael Homel
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Jian Huang
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Tao Jin
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Dickson Kachuma
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Mohammad Karimi-Fard
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Sergey Klevtsov
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Alexandre Lapene
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Victor A. P. Magri
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Daniel Osei-Kuffuor
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Stefan Povolny
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Shabnam J. Semnani
  - name: Chris S. Sherman
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Melvin Rey
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Hamdi A. Tchelepi
    affiliation: 3
  - name: William R. Tobin
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Pavel Tomin
    affiliation: 4
  - name: Lionel Untereiner
    orcid: 0000-0002-8025-2616
  - name: Joshua A. White
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Hui Wu
    affiliation: 1
affiliations:
 - name: Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA
   index: 1
 - name: TotalEnergies E&P Research & Technology, USA
   index: 2
 - name: Stanford University, USA
   index: 3
 - name: Chevron Technical Center, USA
   index: 4
 - name: Politecnico di Torino, Italy
   index: 5
date: 15 December 2023
bibliography: paper.bib

---

# Summary

> GEOS is a simulation framework focused solving tightly-coupled multi-physics problems with an initial emphasis subsurface reservoir applications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
GEOS is a simulation framework focused on solving tightly-coupled multi-physics problems with an initial emphasis on subsurface reservoir applications.
```

Currently GEOS actively supports implementations for studying carbon sequestration, geothermal energy, hydrogen storage, and similar subsurface applications.
The unique aspect of GEOS that differentiates it from existing reservoir simulators is the ability to provide tightly-coupled compositional flow, poromechanics, faults and fractures slip, and thermal effects, etc.

> The GEOS repository is hosted GitHub [@GEOS:2024], and extensive documentation is available on Read the Docs [@GEOS_RTD].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The GEOS repository is hosted on GitHub [@GEOS:2024], and extensive documentation is available on Read the Docs [@GEOS_RTD].
```

> Note that the version of GEOS described here should be considered a separate work form the previous incarnation of GEOS referred to in [@Settgast:2017].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that the version of GEOS described here should be considered a separate work form the earlier version mentioned in [@Settgast:2017].
```

# Statement of need

The increasing threat of climate change has resulted in an increased focus on mitigating carbon emissions into the atmosphere.

> Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) of CO2 in subsurface reservoirs and saline aquifers is an important component in the strategy to meet global climate goals. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) of CO<sub>2</sub> in subsurface reservoirs and saline aquifers is an important component in the strategy to meet global climate goals. 
```
does it work?

Given the 2050 net-zero GHG goals, CO2 storage capacities required to offset emissions is orders of magnitude greater than current levels [@IPCC_2023].
The ability to evaluate the reservoir performance and containment risks associated with the injection of liquefied CO2 in the subsurface in a reproducible and transparent manner is an important consideration when developing new storage sites.

> The primary goal of GEOS is to provide the global community with an open-source tool that is capable of simulating the complex coupled physics that occurs when liquefied CO2 is injected into a subsurface reservoir. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The primary goal of GEOS is to provide the global community with an open-source tool that is capable of simulating the complex coupled physics that occurs when liquefied CO<sub>2</sub>  is injected into a subsurface reservoir. 
```

Reviewer 3: Resolved

As an example of the weak scalability of GEOS on exascale systems, we present two weak scaling studies on a simple wellbore geometry using the exascale Frontier supercomputer located at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL).
The results from the weak scaling study (Figure \ref{fig:Frontier_scaling}a) shows flat scaling of the GEOS processes (assembly/field synchronization) up to 16,384 MPI ranks and 81.3e9 degrees-of-freedom (1/4 of Frontier).
There is a moderate decrease in efficiency with the application of the hypre preconditioner setup and solve, but given the complexity of those algorithms this level of scaling efficiency is excellent.
The compositional flow study presented in Figure \ref{fig:Frontier_scaling}b shows similarly good weak scaling. 

![Weak scaling results on ORNL/Frontier: execution time per timestep vs number of cluster ranks for a mechanics (a) and a compositional flow (b) simulation, respectively.\label{fig:Frontier_scaling}](GEOS_Frontier_scaling.pdf){ width=100% }

# Acknowledgements

> This work performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This work was performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344
```
